[Music]
The next topic is templates.
Templates is one way to realize
static polymorphism in C++.
This is in contrast to dynamic polymorphism.
Templates allow you to use
generic types, as you, for example do it with the containers,
you can define a vector of a certain type
and at compile time you can basically choose,
which one you want to use.
So this is the polymorphism at compile time,
or also static polymorphism.
And there are two kinds of templates.
So you have the class templates and the function templates.
Here you see two examples:
first defines a class "MyClass" that has
two template parameters and the second
is a function "print", that has one template parameter.
The interesting thing is, for example,
now you can use the "print" function on different types,
so you can print a string,
you can print an integer,
you can print your own class type
and you only have to implement
one print function for that.
The template parameter is basically the name.
This is analog to the function parameter,
that is specified in the template parameter list.
And this name you can also use
inside the definition of a template.
There are two types of parameters.
They can be type or non type template parameters.
If you want to use a class template,
you must specify actual arguments
for each template parameter.
So that means at compile time the compiler has to know
which concrete type you want to insert
for the template parameter
in order to instantiate an object of the class type.
When you use a function template,
then the compiler deduces the template arguments
from the arguments in the call
and instantiates this specific function
using these template arguments.
Now if you take a closer look at the non type parameters,
then they basically represent a value.
So when a function template is instantiated,
then each non type parameter
is bound to a constant expression.
As it is indicated by the arguments,
that you use in the call.
And when a class template is instantiated,
then each non type parameter is bound to a constant expression,
as indicated by the arguments used
in the class instantiation.
So this holds for non type parameters.
The type parameters, this is a name used
in the template parameter list,
to represent a type of course,
when you then instantiate the template,
then each type parameter is bound to an actual type.
In a function template these types are inferred
from the arguments,
or can also be explicitly specified in the call.
And the type arguments must,
as I have said already, be specified for a class template,
when you use the class template.
The template parameter list is now defined
to be a list of type or non-type parameters
separated by commas.
So this is exactly analog to the function parameter list.
And also the template argument is analog
to the function argument,
now a type or a value specified,
when using a template type,
such as when defining an object or naming a type in a cast.
This hint in the last line
addresses the requirements for these argument types.
Of course inside of for example the function template,
when you use then the template argument,
then for example,
if you use an operator on it
then the type must support this operator,
otherwise it will not work
and you should really be sure,
that you only use types that fulfill these requirements
and on the other hand you should not put
too many requirements on it,
otherwise you restrict the possible parameter types.
Some word about the "typename" keyword.
It's in principle in the parameter list equivalent to class.
If there is any doubt,
whether the type name is necessary or not,
to indicate that a name is a type,
then it is usually a good idea to specify it.
In principle before any type in the source code
you can also write "typename" and then the type.
So it just indicates that the next token is the type.
So then about template instantiation.
What is it?
It is a compiler process,
where the actual template arguments are used
to generate a specific instance of the template,
in which the parameters are replaced
by the corresponding arguments.
So for functions they are instantiated automatically,
based on the arguments used in a call.
Again template arguments must be provided explicitly,
whenever a class template is used.
And also remember,
that each instantiation of a class template
constitutes an independent class type.
So that means, as an example,
you have a vector, then a "vector<int>"
and a "vector<double>" and a "vector<string>
are three different independent class types.
How does the template argument deduction work?
So first of all this is the process,
by which the compiler determines,
which function template to instantiate.
So the compiler examines the types
of the arguments,
that were specified using a template parameter
and it automatically instantiates a version of the function,
with those types of values bound to the template parameters.
It's similar to the things that happen,
when you call a function,
but there is one really big difference
and this is that you have only very limited conversion
in contrast to classical functions.
So in principle you can say that the parameter types
and the arguments must match exactly.
There are very limited exceptions.
So first of all "const" or "non-const"
conversions can be done
and array or function pointer
conversions can be done,
but as said, usually you should not expect,
that conversions work
in the same way as when you call a function:
like you have an integer parameter in a function
and you pass a double to it.
So this will not work for templates.
So when the address of a function template instantiation is taken,
then the context must be such,
that it allows a unique type of value
to be determined for each template parameter.
That's summary of that.
Now there are also specific templates.
The so called variadic templates.
They allow you to have an arbitrary
and varying number of parameters for your template.
They also have specific syntax that you see here:
So you have "typename T" here
and then the "typename ... Args" and that means,
that here you can provide an arbitrary number
of template arguments.
So in the coding examples we will see,
how you can work with this.
The next point I want to address are type traits.
The type traits are included in the standard library
and they are special classes
that implement a trait.
What is the trait?
It is just a distinguishing quality or characteristic
and it allows you to take decisions,
that you base on the types at compile time.
So you have for example the possibility to check
if your template argument is an integral type,
or is a pointer type, is a reference,
is an object, is a const, or unsigned, or is the same,
So if two template parameter types are the same or not.
And you can even modify your types.
So you can remove the const from your template,
you can remove the reference,
or you also add something like const.
Or more general transformations you can enable something,
if a condition is fulfilled.
So these type traits allow you to control your types,
that you get from the user basically
and to make your code more robust
[Music]